DIGITALEDUCATIONHUBFOR RIGOROUSLEARNINGWITH COMMUNITIES SUMMERINSTITUTE2021 INTERACTIVEGUIDE TUESDAY & WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15 & 16 Affiliated with IUPUI and Martin University and funded by the Indiana Department of Education, GEER Grant PRESENTED BY THE DIGITAL EDUCATION HUB TEAM TABLEOFCONTENTS* Welcome Message Program Overview Meet the DEH Team What is the DEH? DEH Throughlines Collaborative Inquiry Agreements Day 1 - Schedule/Activities Day 2 - Schedule/Activities Day 1 - Land Acknowledgement Review of the Throughlines Getting to Know Each Other (Activity) Revisiting Equity & Inclusion (Activity) Evaluative Action Plan (Activity) Day 2 - Reflection Interconnections Between Throughlines Action Plan (Activity) Home & School Values - Coalition Building (Activity) *Notes pages are not reflected in page count. 􀀂 "􀀁!(t@ltti bub.org 3 4 5 - 6 7 8 9 - 10 11 12 - 13 14 17 18 - 21 22 - 23 25 - 27 28 - 30 32 33 34 - 36 38 - 41 2 WELCOMEMESSAGE Dr. Jeremy F. Price, Brooke Moreland Assistant Professor of Technology, Associate Director Innovation, and Pedagogy in Urban Education; Principal Investigator & Project Director Dear community members, parents, family members, caregivers, educators, and teachers, As the Project Director and Primary Investigator, and the Associate Director of the Digital Education Hub of the Indiana University School of Education-Indianapolis at IUPUI, we are excited to welcome you to the first Community Caucus! We share your concerns about supporting quality, equitable, and inclusive education for all of children in Indiana, concerns that have grown deeper as we work our way through the COVID19 pandemic, as the inequalities that were already there have been made worse. We look forward to working with you and learning with you on these issues, looking to make a difference for all children and learners in the state, especially yours. We are especially excited to welcome our keynote speaker, Andratesha Fritzgerald, author of Antiracism and Universal Design for Learning. She will be engaging with us in this problem-solving journey, sharing her wisdom and experiences to help us to figure out ways to meet the goals of equitable and inclusive education with technology a reality. This caucus is being planned and organized by a dedicated and highly talented group of faculty, staff, and students, all dedicated to not only hearing you, but amplifying your voices and promoting your agency so that all learners—irrespective of race, socioeconomics, ethnicity, home language, religion, or ability—can participate with honor in who they are and where they come from and contribute in meaningful ways to their learning, their classrooms, and their broader communities. Jeremy F. Price, PhD & Brooke Moreland Indiana University School of Education-Indianapolis The Digital Education Hub (DEH) זײ ַ געזונ ט well--Be DEHSUMMERINSTITUTE2021OVERVIEW DAY 1 Tuesday, June 15, 12pm-4pm KEYNOTE SPEAKER: ANDRATESHA FRITZGERALD 12:00 -1:15PM Andratesha Fritzgerald, author of Antiracism and Universal Design for Learning: Building Expressways to Success will present on the ways that UDL and culturally responsive and/or sustaining practices open opportunities for learners, particularly multiply marginalized students, during and post-COVID-19. INTRODUCTION TO THE DIGITAL EDUCATION HUB 1:15 -1:45PM Here we will introduce the DEH Team and Facilitators, provide background and context for the Institute, and go though the interactive guide to talk about content and flow. THE SIX DEH THROUGHLINES & ACTIVITY 1 -"VALUES" 1:45 -2:30PM We will review the DEH "throughlines" in relation to keynote presentation and then engage in an interactive activity comparing family/community values with school values. EMPOWERING FAMILIES & ACTIVITY 2 -"ACTION PLAN" 2:45 -4:00PM We will have the opportunity to reflect upon and write about one of the throughlines, "Empowering Families" and complete an evaluative action plan to inform future directions for the DEH. Wednesday, June 16, 1pm-4pm DAY 2 THROUGHLINES: EMPOWERING FAMILIES & COALITION BUILDING 1:00 -1:30PM Reflection EXPANDING ON EMPOWERING FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES 1:30 -2:30PM Revisit yesterday's evaluations and add to or expand upon understandings. MAPPING A WAY FORWARD 2:45-4:00PM All stakeholders will consider the two throughlines in relation to the DEH materials and resources with the aim to produce actionable steps forward in their own specific contexts specifically thinking about home values, school values and their intersections. 4 MEETTHEDEHTEAM AUTHORS Cristina Santamaría Graff, Ph.D. is an Associate Professor of Special Education in the Urban Teacher Education Department at IUPUI. She is a Co-Principal Investigator on the DEH Team and brings her experience working with families of children with dis/abilities and community engagement to this project. Amy Waechter-Versaw, Ph.D. is the Assistant Director of Teacher Learning & School Partnerships for the DEH project. She brings her experiences with teacher learning through sociocultural perspectives of professional development and educator networking and communities of practice to the project. CONTRIBUTORS Paula Magee, Ph.D. is a Clinical Professor of Science Education in the School of Education at IUPUI. She is a Co-Principal Investigator on the DEH Team and her experiences on using inquiry and culturally relevant pedagogies to prepare preservice teachers to teach in K-12 classrooms. Her work with in-service teachers has centered around the role of mentoring in the supervision process and exploring culturally relevant pedagogies in practice. Ted Hall, Ph.D. is an Associate Professor of Education at Martin University. Dr. Hall’s scholarly interests span instructional design, critical pedagogy, and community-based inquiry methodologies, which has involved extensive field research and teaching in West Africa, China, and the Americas. Dr. Hall serves as a Co-PI and consultant on the project. 5 CONTRIBUTORS CONTINUED Clifton Snorten is a doctoral student in the Urban Education program at IUPUI. He is a Graduate Assistant on the DEH Team and bring his experience in fighting for equitable educational opportunities for all children to this project. Gabrielle Kirby is an undergraduate student studying elementary education at IUPUI. She helps with various projects on the DEH team and hopes to use this project as a way to gain a new perspective and learn how to better serve the community. Anneleen J. Knoors, B.A. is a Graduate student in the Counseling & Counselor Education program at IUPUI’s School of Education. She is working on various projects on the DEH Team and is currently a student counselor with Indianapolis Public Schools. She hopes to bring her experience in advocating for Gender and Sexual Minorities to the project while learning more about advocacy for the many other disadvantaged groups. Citation: Santamaría Graff, C., & Waechter-Versaw, A. (2021). Digital Education Hub for Rigorous Learning with Communities, Summer Institute 2021. Interactive Guide. The DEH Online Summer Institute: June 15 -16, 2021. 6 WHATISTHEDEH? About In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, educators from the Indiana University School of Education-Indianapolis have innovated the Digital Education Hub for Rigorous Learning with Communities. The Digital Education Hub (DEH) is a comprehensive directory of Education, Resources, and Networking tools and opportunities for educators, community stakeholders, and caregivers. The DEH strives to support Indiana educators, students, and their families as they make sense of education using technology. PurposeThe Digital Education Hub seeks to meet the challenge of remote learning in context and community, grounded in the principles of Culturally Relevant Pedagogy and Universal Design for Learning, the Indiana University School of Education-Indianapolis at IUPUI proposes the Digital Education Hub (DEH) for Rigorous Remote Learning with Communities. Objectives (1) Strengthen Instructional Practices: Help teachers adopt the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to use digital tools and platforms for equitable, rigorous and engage remote learning. (2) Provide Digital Learning Resources and Engagement Strategies for Families: Provide adults with resources to help their students during remote learning and helping teachers and administrators optimize collaborative family engagement. (3) Build Administrative Capacity: Help administrators bridge supervisory practices to the online environment and identifying digital tools for administrators to support project management and communications during times of remote learning. (4) Support Educator Self-Care: Provide educators with the tools to address the new emotional, social, and physical challenges faced during remote teaching. (5) Prepare Remote-Ready Future Teachers: Ensure that future teachers entering the field are ready to implement equitable and inclusive teaching remotely in the face of unforeseen circumstances. THROUGHLINES Throughlines "run through" and inform different themes or topics via interconnected conceptual understandings. EMPOWERING FAMILIES & COMMUNITIES Families and community members are key stakeholders in determining the ways materials and resources are accessible, equitable, and inclusive for all students. COALITION BUILDING The educational environment is co-constructed through a historical reciprocal process of interdependence to ensure all voices are included in building equitable and inclusive learning networks and partnerships. MULTIPLE WAYS OF KNOWING & DOING The knowledge and wisdom of the students, families, and communities are centered in content and materials to promote equitable and inclusive learning experiences. INTENTIONAL USE OF TECHNOLOGY Technology is used in a purposeful manner that is informed by context and is oriented toward building equitable and inclusive learning environments. DEEP & TRANSFORMATIONAL LEARNING The promotion of academic success and transformational ends through a rigorous and integrated process that honors learners and communities as cultural entities and works to change the world to be a more equitable and inclusive place. EQUITABLE PRACTICES & SYSTEMS Leading learning and knowledge sharing is mediated through equitable and inclusive dispositions and decision-making processes that promote the success of disenfranchised learners and communities. COLLABORATIVEINQUIRYPROCESS During this Caucus, you will be engaging with the throughlines via a four-step, iterative and overlapping process. ENGAGE: In the collaborative inquiry process, participants will have the opportunity to work with others in multiple ways to deepen their understandings about the role they will play in contributing knowledge and insights to the DEH project. INTERACT: Through collaboration, participants will be looking at and analyzing multiple resources and materials connected to the DEH website for the purpose of determining how useful, effective and meaningful they are in relation to students' classroom, the home, and the community. INTEGRATE: During collaborative inquiry, the participants will be able to demonstrate what they have learned through interacting with the DEH materials and resources while engaging with one another through active discussions for the purpose of applying their insights to inform the DEH website and contributing to digital learning environments. REFLECT: Before, during, or after engaging, interacting, and integrating, participants will have the opportunity to think about, process, and share out about the learning taking place. COLLABORATIVEINQUIRYICONS ENGAGE INTERACT INTEGRATE REFLECT 10 AGREEMENTS-(R.O.A.R.S.) WAYSTOENTERTHESPACETOWORKIN COLLABORATIONWITHONEANOTHER RESPECT: Though we may have different backgrounds or points of view, I enter this space respecting every person through my language, gestures, and actions. OPENNESS: I set the intention to enter this space with an open mind and heart so that I can give and receive information, knowledge, and wisdom through shared experience. ACTIVE LISTENING: I am present in this moment to hear my neighbor's words, to reflect on what is being said, to bear witness to the stories, and to give supportive, thoughtful feedback. RECIPROCAL: This is a mutually beneficial space where our actions of giving and receiving lead to the well-being of children/students who are at the center of our intentions. STRIVING: In this co-created space, I strive to expand and stretch my imagination to be as inclusive and equitable in my thinking for the purpose of contributing my valuable insights to this important endeavor. DAY1-SCHEDULE&ACTIVITIES 12:00 -12:45PM: Keynote Speaker, Andratesha Fitzgerald Andratesha 12:45 -1:15PM: Interactive Question & Answer Session Fritzgerald has worked in education for nearly 20 years. As a teacher, curriculum specialist, and district level administrator she has embraced the hard work and heart work of leading and learning. She is an international keynote speaker, award-winning author and inclusive practices implementation consultant. Her life’s work is to awaken, celebrate and activate brilliance by breaking barriers and stereotypes of teachers, leaders and students to actualize achievement wherever it seems impossible. A self proclaimed book nerd, Jeopardy enthusiast and imagination expert, she loves writing and dreaming out loud with her husband, two children and committed educators who believe in academic success for all. Her new book Antiracism and Universal Design for Learning: Building Expressways to Success (CAST, 2020), is equipping teachers and leaders with the tools they need to make learning personal and possible for every child. Connect with her on buildingblocksofbrilliance.com or on Twitter @FritzTesha 12 Land & Community Acknowledgement Introduction to the DEH Team & Facilitators Quick Padlet or Chat - "Introductions" R.O.A.R.S. - Agreements Background & Purpose of the DEH Caucus Brief overview of the Interactive Guidebook Brief Overview of the Throughlines in consideration of Keynote perspectives - DEH Facilitator Small group activity: Families' values and School's values: What we learned during COVID-19 (and beyond) - JAMBOARD SUMMARY DAY 1 - CONTINUED 1:15 - 1:45PM: Introduction to the Digital Education Hub BREAK 1:45 - 2:30PM: The Six Throughlines & Activity 1 Introduction to an Evaluative Action Plan in relation to Empowering Families and DEH materials Large group discussion and takeaways (Think Piece) 2:45 - 4:00PM: Empowering Families & Activity 2 13DAY 2 Revisit pre-Institute contributions & yesterday's evaluations- How can we add to or expand these understandings on empowering families & communities? 1:30 - 2:30 1:00 - 1:30PM: Reflection & Interconnections between Throughlines Group Activity: Revisit Home and School Values; Venn Diagram: How are different identities being included/excluded made visible/invisible in schools (in person, online)? What needs to be considered in Coalition Building? Large group discussion and takeaways Where do we go from here? 2:45 - 4:00: BREAK 14Notes Thoughts or Reflections on Keynote Presentation 15 Notes 16 Day 1 Land Acknowledgement We acknowledge and honor the ground beneath our feet and recognize the cultural and historical legacies it holds for us if we dare to (re)member. What messages can we learn from the land, air, water and space around us and our communities? Prayer Bowl When the moon is turned upwards like a bowl waiting to be filled We must fill it. We must fill it by honoring the spirits of creation With songs of our joy and thanks, with foods created with our own hands, Water for the the thirsty, prayers for the people, prayers for the spirits, Prayers for the Creator, prayers for ourselves, and the sacred instruments That join us to the glory of this world, that join us to the glory of this world And to the world beyond our sleep. KarenneWood(1960-2019),Monacan,wasapoetandlinguisticanthropologist.17 Review of the Throughlines Let's consider these throughlines in relation to Andratesha Fritzgerald's presentation. 18 19 19 20 21 21 Getting to Know Each Another Through Our Families & Understandings of School Modeling + Breakout Group Session Before beginning, the DEH will model what the activity in the breakout sessions will look like. Break out groups will consist of 3 -4 people. Instructions: 1. In your small groups, you will get to know one another using specific prompts. This is a "speed interviewing" format, so answers need to be brief. 2.Introduce yourselves. 3.Choose 1 person as a timekeeper to make sure that everyone has an opportunity to speak since each person will only have about 2 minutes to answer each prompt for this activity. A DEH facilitator will be the Scribe taking notes on a Group Jamboard. 4.Using Handout 1: Getting to Know Each Other as a guide (found on next page), each group member will choose 1 prompt from the column, "Your Current or Childhood Home & Values." 5.Then, each person has 2 minutes to talk about your home experience and values. 6.After the first rotation, each group member will choose 1 prompt from the column, "School Values" and, like before, will have 2 minutes speak about this topic. 7.After the second rotation, we will meet as a large group. One representative from each group will briefly summarize 1 or 2 points about what was discussed in the group. 8.Brief summary of discussion facilitated by DEH member. This activity has been adapted from: Teemant, A., Borgioli, G., & Santamaría Graff, C. (2019) Family, Community, & School Engagement Instructional Guide. Partnering for Radical Transformation of Schooling: Engaging with Equity. Teemant & Associates, LLC. Greenwood, IN. 22 Getting to Know Each Another Through Our Families & Understandings of School Prompts Your Current Home or Childhood Home & Values What is your favorite family tradition? What values are important to your family? How does your family express love or support for each other? What rules govern your home? Tell me about literacy practices in your childhood home. As a child, if you or another family member 'got in trouble' how did your parents/caregivers handle this? In what ways do your family members typically communicate with one another? What were some good surprises you learned about your family members during COVID? School's Values "School" here can be a specific school or "school" in general. What do you or your family members appreciate about school? What values do schools prioritize? What are schools' expectations (here in the United States)? How are schools welcoming or not? What rules govern school? How do schools express support for students and families? How do schools typically communicate with students and families? What are some good surprises you learned about schools during COVID? What are some surprising challenges you realized about schools during COVID? Thisactivityhasbeenadaptedfrom:23 Teemant, A., Borgioli, G., & Santamaría Graff, C. (2019) Family, Community, & School Engagement Instructional Guide. Partnering for Radical Transformation of Schooling: Engaging with Equity. Teemant & Associates, LLC. Greenwood, IN. Notes 24 Instructions: Pre-Institute Contributions Pre-Institute Contributions During this activity, we will be keeping in mind our home values and what we perceive to be school values. What are some similarities? What are the differences? What tensions arise between the two environments? We will consider what we believe to be inclusive and equitable practices as we review a brief summary of these practices as shared by community stakeholders in a previous meeting. With these points in mind, we will evaluate DEH materials/resources thinking specifically about equity and inclusion through the lens of "empowering families and communities." 25 Summary of Pre-Institute Contributions COMMUNITY Main Themes -EQUITY What is equity to you? What does it look like in schools? Equity means fairness. In schools. it means that students and their families are valued, recognized, and respected. They are not judged based on who they are or where they are from and are accepted for the multiple identities they embody. Equity is access to resources, opportunities, and funding that contribute to fair practices for all students. What does equity look like in classrooms? Equity means fairness. In schools. it means that students and their families are valued, recognized, and respected. They are not judged based on who they are or where they are from and are accepted for the multiple identities they embody. Equity is access to resources, opportunities, and funding that contribute to fair practices for all students. What does equity look like in online learning? Equity is free access to online resources and tools that benefit each student's learning style and needs. It is also embedded support structures that ensure all students receive the assistance and technological skills they need to be successful. 26 Summary of Pre-Institute Contributions COMMUNITY Main Themes -INCLUSION What is inclusion to you? What does it look like in schools? All voices, needs, and points of view are considered and heard so that a sense of belonging is engendered. Individuals have opportunities to participate in decision-making impacting students in school. Neighborhood schools have 'open door' policies for all students regardless of dis/ability and other specialized needs. What do inclusive practices look like in the classroom? Special education inclusive practices include more push-in rather than pullout services. In general, inclusive practices are those that welcome rather than exclude students. This welcoming looks like teacher/educator encouragement of students and a commitment to provide students multiple and continuous opportunities to be successful in, to participate in, and take responsibility for their own learning. What do inclusive practices look like in online settings? Inclusive practices in online settings are flexible, differentiated, and take a student's individualized learning environment and schedules (time/due dates) into consideration. Inclusive online tools are provided to all students in an equitable manner and give students multiple pathways to engage with and express their learning through resources representative of their learning styles and cultural, familial, and historical backgrounds. Evaluative Action Plan Empowering Families & Communities INSTRUCTIONS: In groups, you will be given specific materials or resources generated by/for the Digital Education Hub (DEH). These materials may include lesson plans, tutorials, modules, website resources/tools, or other products/processes related to the DEH. Using an evaluative tool, you will assess how equitable and inclusive the DEH materials are for students, families, and/or communities in relation to our discussion centered on equity and inclusion. 28 Evaluation of Materials -Part 1 As you are filling out this evaluative assessment form, you should be thinking about whether or not the criteria were met and why or why not. EQUITY What is the resource or material your group is evaluating? Is the resource or material bias free? Yes or no? Explain. (Consider the way that race, gender, ability -dis/ability, language, etc. are presented or not presented). Is the resource or material accessible? Yes or no? Explain. (Consider if students with and without learning challenges can access the material. Consider if those teaching from these materials will find it easy to do so. Consider if the technology connected to this resource is easy to find and use). Does the resource or material honor and show respect of students' and their families' backgrounds, values, and knowledge? Yes or no? Explain. 29 Evaluation of Materials -Part 2 As you are filling out this evaluative assessment form, you should be thinking about whether or not the criteria were met and why or why not. INCLUSION What is the resource or material your group is evaluating? Write "same" if applicable. Is the resource or material representing different points of view and perspectives? Are students' strengths/assets being highlighted through this material? Yes or no? Explain. Does the resource or material allow for students to take responsibility for their own learning? For example, is there student choice in the material? Does the material/resource "welcome" students to take charge of their own learning and learning independence? Yes or no? Explain. Does the resource or material provide students with multiple ways to engage with the learning while giving the various, differentiated ways to show what they have learned? Is the material/resource flexible in taking students' learning styles and environments into account? Yes or no? Explain. 30 Notes End of Day 1 31 Day 2 Image: pexels.com What are your dreams and hopes for our students this upcoming academic year and post-COVID? Reflection: 32 Interconnections Between "Empowering Families & Communities" and "Coalition Building" 33 ACTION PLAN: How can we add to or expand upon "Empowering Families & Communities"? -Part I Beginning an "Action Plan" -In this activity, you will work in your groups to analyze the DEH materials and resources and offer specific suggestions about how these materials/resources can be more equitable and inclusive. Refer to your group's evaluation of DEH materials/resources, then ask the questions: How can this material be improved? How can it be more equitable? How can it be more inclusive? a) In thinking about the DEH materials/resources and in light of how these resources can empower students, families and communities, what are specific suggestions/goals you have to improve the integration of students' strengths? Suggestions about elements that are missing, need improvement, or are problematic: Goals for the DEH (short-term or long-term) -What should we be thinking about? For example: The DEH should integrate photos students take of their work to show their interests and ways of understanding the material. 34 ACTION PLAN: How can we add to or expand upon "Empowering Families & Communities"? -Part II b) What concrete ways can families' and communities' voices be heard and their ideas seen in the DEH materials? How can these materials better impact students' overall well-being and academic success in school environments and in online learning? (What does being heard look like, sound like, or feel like?) Suggestions about elements that are missing, need improvement, or are problematic: Goals for the DEH (short-term or long-term) -What should we be thinking about?: 35 ACTION PLAN: How can we add to or expand upon "Empowering Families & Communities"? -Part III c) Examine what you wrote in your evaluations of the DEH materials and/or resources your group analyzed. Look through the overall DEH website. What suggestions do you have to make the DEH website and materials/resources more equitable and inclusive for students, their families, and their communities? Suggestions about elements that are missing, need improvement, or are problematic: Goals for the DEH (short-term or long-term) -What should we be thinking about?: 36 Notes 37 Home and School Values: Connections & Differences -Part 1 Revisit the Jamboard from yesterday on home and school values in the "Getting to Know Each Other" activity. INSTRUCTIONS: Working with your groups, please do the following: Expand upon and discuss your home values and what you believe to be school values or expectations. A DEH team member will write these down in a shared document. Next, using a Venn Diagram, decide, as a group, what are strictly "home" values and "school" values. Then decide what are values of both that intersect. The DEH team member will capture the connections as well as the differences. 38 Home and School Values: Connections & Differences -Part 2 INSTRUCTIONS: After completing the Venn Diagram, you will answer the following questions as a group. The DEH team member will be taking notes on a shared document. Examining the Venn Diagram, what are ways that schools can better integrate families' and communities' knowledge and expertise into (a) the classroom environment, (b) classroom curricula, and (c) classroom instruction? Please take individual notes here: Examining the Venn Diagram, what are ways that the DEH can better highlight and integrate students', families', communities' as well as educators' (teachers') voices in the materials, resources, tools, etc. associated with the HUB? Please take individual notes here: 39 Home and School Values: Connections & Differences -Part 3 INSTRUCTIONS: Time permitting, consider the following questions: How are different identities being included/excluded made visible/invisible in schools (in person, online)? Referring to the slide image below, what needs to be considered in Coalition Building between families/communities and schools? What needs to be considered in Coalition Building between families/communities and schools AND the Digital Education Hub? Homework: These questions are to be completed by all Institute participants either in their groups or individually and turned into the Associate Director, Dr. Brooke Moreland. 40 Home and School Values: Connections & Differences -Part 4 INSTRUCTIONS: PLEASE WRITE YOUR ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS HERE: 41 Notes 42 Thank you for attending the Digital Education Hub's inaugural Summer Institute. For more information about the DEH and its current projects, please go to our website: digitaleducationhub.org 43 